Added blog post about the code outlines (#31)
pavpanchekha/emberfox: blog/outlines.md

you never plan to touch a browser code base. Again, for this purpose,
a high-level overview of how a browser is structured helps a lot.

I saw both of these factors when teaching last year. Over the course
of a few months, students see many different parts of a browser. When
it comes time to edit and refactor (like in [Chapter 10][reflow]) it's
easy to have only a hazy recollection of how the code you're
refactoring actually works. And since I wanted my students to come
away with an understanding of a browser's high-level components, I
wanted to give them a quick way to view the completed browser at an
intermediate level of detail somewhere between the full code listing
and the book's table of contents.

[reflow]: ../reflow.html

# Outlining code

Code outlines are a way to get that intermediate level of detail
directly from the code. It's inspired by code-folding as implemented
in many text editors, reducing functions and classes to single lines.
Plus, in this book's coding style, individual functions directly refer
to specific browser concepts and are usually organized into classes
that refer to specific browser components.

> As far as I know, code folding (like a lot of text editor tools) are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As far as I know, code folding (like a lot of text editor tools) is
```

generally based on regular expressions. So my first attempt at code
outlines was literally to `grep` the code for lines beginning with
`def` or `class`. That worked fairly well to identify functions and
classes, but gave the function definition lines unchanged, like this
one from the current Chapter 11 draft:

    def load(self, url, body=None):

I don't really want to show all of this. Default values aren't
important when you're trying to get a birds-eye view of the code, and
the `self` parameter that Python requires might be pedagogically

> useful when writing code but it's redundant when you're looking at an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
useful when writing code, but it's redundant when you're looking at an
```

Using a parser means I don't need ugly regular expressions, and
guarantees that I don't have to keep the limitations of those regular
expressions in mind as I edit the text.

Using the `ast` library is also really easy: I call `ast.parse` and
then walk the tree looking for `ClassDef`, `FunctionDef`, and `Assign`
expressions, plus those unusual `if` statements that are Python's
version of `int main()`. For classes I walk the class body looking for
function definitions, and for function definitions I extract the
argument names but not their values with:

``` {.python}
args = [arg.arg for arg in stmt.args.args if arg.arg != "self"]
```

I put all this logic into a little program, which takes the Python
file it outlines as an argument. Because I've got a copy of the
browser code at the end of each chapter (as files named `lab1.py`,
`lab2.py`, and so on) I can use the outliner to get an outline for
each chapter.

# Displaying the outlines

I want code outlines at the end of every chapter. But the book itself
is written in Markdown and converted to static HTML with Pandoc, so I
need to somehow run my parser/outliner inside Pandoc. Luckily, Pandoc

> is [scriptable in Lua][pandoc-lua]^[1] and also supports [custom

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is [scriptable in Lua][pandoc-lua][^1] and also supports [custom
```

``` {.lua}
function Div(el)
  if el.classes[1] == "cmd" then
    -- ...
  else
    return el
  end
end
```

[pandoc-lua]: https://pandoc.org/lua-filters.html
[pandoc-blocks]: https://pandoc.org/MANUAL.html#divs-and-spans

[^1]: First time I've had to use the language, so this part was pretty
    slow-going.
    
Pandoc will run this `Div` function on every custom block in the file,
and replace the actual block `el` with whatever this function returns.
I'll be replacing these `cmd` blocks with the results of running a
command like my parser/outliner.

In Pandoc, `Div` objects contain other block-level objects like
paragraphs and code blocks. To avoid problems with punctuation and
inline markup, I decided that the actual command should be inside a
code block:

``` {.lua}
if #el.content ~= 1 or
   el.content[1].t ~= "CodeBlock" then
  error("`cmd` block does not contain a code block")
end
local cmd = el.content[1].text
```

Here `#el.content` gets the length of the `content` list and `~=` is
Lua's not equals operator. Once the command is extracted, the `popen`
function can be used to run the command:

``` {.lua}
local proc = io.popen(cmd)
local results = proc:read("*all")
```

> I'm not Lua expert but I think the colon means calling a function as a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I'm not a Lua expert, but I think the colon means calling a function as a
```

> method while the dot means calling it like a namespaced member. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
method, while the dot means calling it like a namespaced member. The
```

specifically is an outline command.

# Styling the results

The outlines are fairly long. The current final copy of the code has
about 100 functions in 18 classes, and as I add more content that
might grow. But since I've only got argument names, each line is
pretty short; the longest one right now is 46 characters and it's an
outlier. So to make things more digestible I want to show the outline
in two columns, which is pretty easy in CSS:

``` {.css}
.outline { font-size: 60%; font-family: monospace; column-count: 2; }
```

The small font size works out to 15 pixels, small but still readable.
And remember, all the information in the outline is still available in
the other code blocks.

But two columns had a problem: the column break could happen in the
middle of a class, which would look ugly and also lead to confusion
about which function definitions are indented (because they are
methods) and which are not. The `break-inside` property in CSS
prevents that, but I didn't have any HTML element around individual
classes, since I was presenting the output as a source block.

The only way I could think of to fix this (other than rearranging my

> code so that column breaks only occur between classes) would be to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
code so that column breaks only occur between classes) was to
```
